WRITING
Poetry 101: Learn About Poetry, Different Types of Poems, and Poetic Devices With Examples
Written by the MasterClass staff

Last updated: Aug 5, 2021 • 8 min read
Teaches Reading and Writing Poetry
LEARN MORE
Poetry has been around for almost four thousand years. Like other forms of literature, poetry is written to share ideas, express emotions, and create imagery. Poets choose words for their meaning and acoustics, arranging them to create a tempo known as the meter. Some poems incorporate rhyme schemes, with two or more lines that end in like-sounding words.

Today, poetry remains an important part of art and culture. Every year, the United States Library of Congress appoints a Poet Laureate to represent the art of poetry in America. From Shakespearean sonnets to Maya Angelou’s reflective compositions, poems are long-lived, read and recited for generations.

Learn From the Best

What Is a Stanza?
What Is a Rhyme Scheme?
15 Types of Poetic Forms
What Is Imagery in Poetry?
What Is the Difference Between Blank Verse and Free Verse Poetry?
What Is Mimesis in Poetry?
What Is Onomatopoeia in Poetry?
What Is Enjambment in Poetry?
What Is Dissonance in Poetry?
What Is Consonance in Poetry?
What Is Assonance in Poetry?
What Is Alliteration in Poetry?
Learn More About Billy Collins's MasterClass
What Is Poetry?
Poetry is a type of literature that conveys a thought, describes a scene or tells a story in a concentrated, lyrical arrangement of words. Poems can be structured, with rhyming lines and meter, the rhythm and emphasis of a line based on syllabic beats. Poems can also be freeform, which follows no formal structure.
The basic building block of a poem is a verse known as a stanza. A stanza is a grouping of lines related to the same thought or topic, similar to a paragraph in prose. A stanza can be subdivided based on the number of lines it contains. For example, a couplet is a stanza with two lines.
On the page, poetry is visibly unique: a narrow column of words with recurring breaks between stanzas. Lines of a poem may be indented or lengthened with extra spacing between words. The white space that frames a poem is an aesthetic guide for how a poem is read.

Meet One of Your New Instructors
GET STARTED
1.00
Video Player is loading.

What Is Meter in Poetry?
A poem can contain many elements to give it structure. Rhyme is perhaps the most common of these elements: countless poetic works, from limericks to epic poems to pop lyrics, contain rhymes. But equally important is meter, which imposes specific length and emphasis on a given line of poetry. Learn more about meter in poetry here.








                              Chapter 1.

                      Paradise Pickles & Preserves
May in Ayemenem is a hot, brooding month. The days are long and humid. The river
shrinks and black crows gorge on bright mangoes in still, dustgreen trees. Red bananas
ripen. Jackfruits burst. Dissolute bluebottles hum vacuously in the fruity air. Then they
stun themselves against clear windowpanes and die, fatly baffled in the sun.
The nights are clear, but suffused with sloth and sullen expectation.
But by early June the southwest monsoon breaks and there are three months of wind
and water with short spells of sharp, glittering sunshine that thrilled children snatch to
play with. The countryside turns an immodest green. Boundaries blur as tapioca fences
take root and bloom. Brick walls turn moss green. Pepper vines snake up electric poles.
Wild creepers burst through laterite banks and spill across flooded roads. Boats ply in
the bazaars. And small fish appear in the puddles that fill the PWD potholes on the
highways.
It was raining when Rahel came back to Ayemenem. Slanting silver ropes slammed
into loose earth, plowing it up like gunfire. The old house on the hill wore its steep,
gabled roof pulled over its ears like a low hat. The walls, streaked with moss, had grown
soft, and bulged a little with dampness that seeped up from the ground. The wild,
overgrown garden was full of the whisper and scurry of small lives. In the undergrowth a
rat snake rubbed itself against a glistening stone. Hopeful yellow bullfrogs cruised the
scummy pond for mates. A drenched mongoose flashed across the leaf-strewn
driveway.
The house itself looked empty. The doors and windows were locked. The front
verandah bare. Unfurnished. But the skyblue Plymouth with chrome tailfins was still
parked outside, and inside, Baby Kochamma was still alive.
She was Rahel’s baby grandaunt, her grandfather’s younger sister. Her name was
really Navomi, Navomi Ipe, but everybody called her Baby. She became Baby
Kochamma when she was old enough to be an aunt. Rahel hadn’t come to see her,
though. Neither niece nor baby grandaunt labored under any illusions on that account.
Rahel had come to see her brother, Estha. They were two-egg twins. “Dizygotic” doctors
called them. Born from separate but simultaneously fertilized eggs. Estha—Esthappen
was the older by eighteen minutes.
They never did look much like each other, Estha and Rahel, and even when they were
thin-armed children, flat-chested, wormridden and Elvis Presley-puffed, there was none
of the usual “Who is who?” and “Which is which?” from oversmiling relatives or the
Syrian Orthodox bishops who frequently visited the Ayemenem House for donations.
The confusion lay in a deeper, more secret place.
In those early amorphous years when memory had only just begun, when life was full
of Beginnings and no Ends, and Everything was Forever, Esthappen and Rahel thought
of themselves together as Me, and separately, individually, as We or Us. As though they
were a rare breed of Siamese twins, physically separate, but with joint identities.
Now, these years later, Rahel has a memory of waking up one night giggling at
Estha’s funny dream.
She has other memories too that she has no right to have.
She remembers, for instance (though she hadn’t been there), what the Orangedrink
Lemondrink Man did to Estha in Abhilash Talkies. She remembers the taste of the
tomato sandwiches—Estha’s sandwiches, that Estha ate—on the Madras Mail to
Madras.
And these are only the small things.
Anyway, now she thinks of Estha and Rahel as Them, because, separately, the two of
them are no longer what They were or ever thought They would be.